.. (C) 2023,2024 Albert Mietus. Part of CCastle project

.. _AR_PyPackages:

.. sidebar:: Note

   In this article we focus on the python implementation of CCastle Compiler, and use python terminology. Partly,
   because it is needed to design that well, partly because this is a first step into the ultimate goal, the CCastle
   implementation of all Castle :ref:`Workshop Tools <Workshop-Design>`.
   |BR|
   And, because “the zen of python” is a good inspiration, studding it seems wise.

===============================
Short: PyPackages (START/DRAFT)
===============================

Most of the AR-components as described in e.g ‘:ref:`AR_pipeline`’ are *plugins*: independent deplorable packages.
As there are two views of *packages* [#packaging]_, associated by how to use them: (1) *import* and (2) *distribution*
packages, we need to **design** this well.

Seen from the ‘*4+1 Architectural View Model*’ [#4+1AR]_ this is part of the “Deployment view”. And as such, a valuable reason to describe &
study the options in details

.. admonition:: Summary & Conclusions (ToDo)

   For those, that are not interested in de design-study, this is the result

   * The top-level namespace is ‘castle’, for all public, more-or-less official packages
   * Only base packages (which can’t be a plugin) are located directly in ‘castle’. Also some generic “main/app” routines can be located there. 

     - ``castle.aigr``,      the common intermediate langage
     - ``castle.monorail``,  the code to load the plugins and put them in the pipeline

   * Most packages are plugins and use a namespace that denotes the “location” in the pipeline; in plural form to
     denotes the are options.

     - ``castle.readers.<name>``
     - ``castle.transformers.<name>``
     - ``castle.writers.<name>`` (not *backends*, as only the writer-part is part of Castle.)

   * Use “pep 420” *native namespace packages* for all plugins.

     - *In short*:  plugins should **never** put an `__init__.py` file in a *shared* namespace-part (like castle.readers.)
     - Only the “main” package is allowed to put files there.

   * Optional, auxiliary (plugin) packages are usually named (placed-in)

     - ``castle.<loc>.plugins.<opt>``.

   * Local (non public) extensions should normally *not* be in ‘castle’.
   * Optional plugins, that can be shared by many plugins for test, debug & development purposed are allowed in one
     place in the castle-hierarchy,

     - ``castle.TESTDOUBLES.<hier>``,

       - *TESTDOUBLES* is in capitals, to signal it’s a specical case
       - Those plugins should *not* have production code -- no application should depend/need those
         |BR| (But for test & verification)
       - *‘<hier>’* is typical namespace, below castle, like: aigr

     - ``castle.TESTDOUBLES.aigr.sieve`` holds (parts of) ‘:ref:`Castle-TheSieve`’ in ‘:ref:`AIGR`’, As test-input for
       e.g. plugins. Or as reference for a reader.


.. hint:: Suppose we make the “nice-fsm-plugin” that act as transformer ...

   .. note:: The resulting namespace will be: |BR| ``castle.transformers.fsm.nice_fsm``

   The name of the top directly does not matter (for python). We advice a name that shows it’s not a python-id, and is
   related to the package name. For example:
   |BR|
   ``<nice-fsm-plugin>``

   This directory contains the *only* package-info-file, which name a content depends on the (package) build systems.
   E.g.

   * ``pyproject.toml`` (`setup.py` is outdated)

     + **name**     *:str*        e.g. ``castle-RPy-writer`` or “nice-fsm-castle-plugin”
     + *version*    *:str*        typical a dotted number (as string)
     + **dependencies** *:List[str]*  =[ ``castle-aigr``, `<package-names>`, ...]

   We need a file-hierarchy, with *empty* directories, that mirror the (shared) namespace

   * ``<nice-fsm-plugin>/castle/``                  -- empty, no `__init__,py`
   * ``<nice-fsm-plugin>/castle/transformers/``     -- empty, no `__init__,py`
   * ``<nice-fsm-plugin>/castle/transformers/fsm``  -- empty, no `__init__,py`
   * ``<nice-fsm-plugin>/castle/transformers/fsm/nice_fsm``  Holds all code:

     - **__init__.py**  can be empty, but typically uses ``from .<> import <>`` to have the “api functionality” available
     - **<files>.py**        code
     - **<sub>/**       sub-package, (full-dirname to be included in `packages=[...]` above




Opportunity
===========
Let study the options, our needs and how others handle packages & plugins, before designing for castle.


Importing
---------

When `import`\ing a package we (typical) use a hierarchical namespace to make the functionality of (a part of) the
package available. For example ``import castle.aigr`` will load that common package.
|BR|
It dotted name show :ref:`aigr<AIGR>` is part of castle.

Packages that are optional, or where alternatives are available, are conveniently bundled in an extra ‘layer’:

- ``from castle.readers import typicalReader as reader``
- ``from castle.TESTDOUBLES.readers import mockReader as reader`` (selected option for mocks)
- ``from castle.readers import mockReader as reader``    (alternative, not preferred)


The “dotted names” gives the user/SW-engineer an hint on which (sub)packages are available, and where it fits. Aside of
that, the name is not very important. During importing we can even *rename* a package, with the `as <name>`  langage feature.

.. note:: The functionality does not depend on the name!

   After a package is imported, all it’s functionality is available; always. The name of the (sub)package isn’t
   relevant, nor is the (disk) location.
   It is also possible to use castle-plugins when they are not located in the *castle.namespace*. As shown by the
   next example:
   |BR|
   ``from myLocal.Hack import MyOwnReader as reader`` (not advised).

Installing
----------

When `(pip) install`\ing a **distribution** package, typically a zip-file is downloaded, and extracte into a
directory. The name of that directory typically correspondes with the namespace, when importing.
|BR|
The developer of a distribution specifies (has to design) in which namespaces (“directory”) the functionality becomes
available.

For small, simple packages this is straightforward. Typically, the *directories* ‘in’ the distribution (zipfile) match the
name(s) that are used to import it.
|BR|
For bigger packages --especially when using plugins, and multiple parties can contribute and (independently) distribute
sub-packages-- it a bit more complicated. All parties should agree on the name(s), to make is clear for the users.

A typical user expect that all packages for CCastle become available in `castle.`, or something that is close to it
[#sphinxcontrib]_

Related
-------

There is a clear relation between the tow kind of packages, and for small packages the are typical 1:1. All (importable)
sub-packages are in the same “zip.
|BR|
For bigger packages/distributions  -- and certainly for when using “plugins”-- this is not the case.

Namespaces Packages
-------------------

It is possible to combine several *distribution packages* into one *importable* packages (structure). This is called
*namespace package(s)*. Since python-3.3 (pep 420), this is standardised in `Native namespace packages
<https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/packaging-namespace-packages/#native-namespace-packages>`__.

In short: each independent sub-package-developer should use of a common (same name), but “empty” top-directory. That
dir should be ‘in’ the distribution-package (aka the zipfile). That dir should only contain a (1) sub-dir. And all files
should be in that sub-dir.

.. warning:: The name of that common directory should be aligned!

XXXX



Why?
====

Clarity
--------

It should be easy for the user to understand which package is related to CCastle and how it is related. Some packages are
mandatory (e.g :ref:`castle.aigr <AIGR>`) or are needed in de base-setup, others are (external) plugins. But packages
also have a place in the :ref:`AIGR pipeline <AR_pipeline>` -- it’s convenient to effortlessly tell *readers* and
*backends*  (etc) aside.

Ownership
---------

Each (distribution) package has an owner too. Typical, the have there own “code archive”, own “package-numbering” and
“release cycle”, ect. This also aplies to plugins! They should be (able to) deployed independently.
|BR|
In practice, “ownership” (like: who owns the code-archive, but also “when” to release) are the borders that define the
distribution-packages.

------

XXXX

------


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#packaging]
   .. seealso:: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects

.. [#4+1AR]
   I often use a “modern, OO variation of the standard `4+1 AR model <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/4+1_architectural_view_model>`__”
   to describe architecture.  As the `original paper <https://www.cs.ubc.ca/~gregor/teaching/papers/4+1view-architecture.pdf>`__
   comes from the pre-OO-era, its jargon is a   bit outdated.
   |BR|
   See e.g. http://systemenbetermaken.nl/AR/ for some slides about it -- one-day I will make a blog ..


.. [#sphinxcontrib]
   For example many extensions for “Sphinx” are available as a sub-package of ``sphinxcontrib``, where sphinx itself is
   locates in ``sphinx`` (notice: `sphinxcontrib` is used, not `sphinx.contrib` -- possible because namespace-package
   wheren’t available/standardised when sphinx(contrib) started.)
   |BR|
   In this location one can find  mostly “standard extensions”.

   Other (independent) sphinx-additions are installed (aka can be found) in  ``sphinx_<name>``. Despite those namespaces
   (and directories) are completely independent for a human/user it clear the are related.
